---
layout: post
title: Towards Another Scientific Revolution
modified_date: 15 September 2013
authors: 
  - name: Sönke Bartling
    orcid: "0000-0001-5434-9433"
  - name: Sascha Friesike
category: basics_background
abstract: "In this introductory chapter we establish a common understanding of what are and what drives current changes in research and science. The concepts of Science 2.0 and Open Science will be introduced. As such we provide a short introduction to the history of science and knowledge dissemination. We explain the origins of our scientific culture which evolved around publication methods. Interdependencies of current concepts will be elucidated and it will be stated that the transition towards Open Science is a complex cultural change. Reasons as to why the change is slow are discussed and the main obstacles are identified. Next, we explain the recent changes in scientific workflows and how these cause changes in the system as a whole. Furthermore, we provide an overview on the entire book and explain what can be found in each chapter."
published: true
---

> But even within those limits, the openness I am advocating would be
a giant cultural shift in how science is done, a second open science
revolution extending and completing the first open science revolution,
of the 17th and 18th centuries.
<small>Michael Nielsen</small>

Nicole Forster’s goal as a researcher is to enhance cancer treatment.
That is why she and her colleagues in the laboratory of Leif W. Ellisen
at Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center in Boston,
Massachusetts, study tumors on individual levels and search for cancer
causes. In March 2012 Forster was trying to isolate ribonucleic acid
(RNA) — the genetic blueprint for proteins within the cell—within mouse
cells. To prepare the cells for her experiment she mixed them with a
special gel that provided them with all the nutrients to grow and
proliferate, even outside the body, for a short period of time. Yet in
the following step, she had to get rid of the gel to get to the
information she needed: the RNA. And therein lay her problem. She had
never done that specific isolation before and hence did not know how to
do it. Her colleagues did not know, either. *“No one in my lab or even
on my floor of the Cancer Center was doing such experiments”*, said
Forster. She was stuck. Then Forster thought of turning to the community
of ResearchGate. ResearchGate is a social network (Boyd & Ellison 2007)
for scientists to exchange ideas, publications, and to discuss research.
Forster had first signed up to ResearchGate in 2009. She had heard about
the network at a conference in Boston and was intrigued: “I thought
that sharing research experience and discussing topics that you always
wanted to discuss with someone would be a great opportunity. I like that
it is a professional network where you can help other people and be
helped.” Since then she had answered multiple questions from fellow
ResearchGate members and now it was her turn to ask the community for
help. Within 24 hours Forster had a solution. Two researchers replied to
her post and suggested different methods. She tried one and it worked.
*“You don’t have to search for the best approach via Google or go
through all of these publications”,* Forster says. A social network for
scientists helped Forster to solve a problem that she had bugged
colleagues about for several weeks within a single day. Forster’s case
is far from uncommon. Researchers all over the world use modern
communication tools such as social networks, blogs, or *Wikipedia* to
enhance their scientific expertise, meet experts, and discuss ideas with
people that face similar challenges. They do not abandon classical means
of scientific communication such as publications or conferences, but
rather they complement them. Today we can see that these novel
communication methods are becoming more and more established in the
lives of researchers; we argue that they may become a significant part
of the future of research. We undertook this book in order to highlight
the different developments that are currently arising in the world of
knowledge creation. We do not know whether all of these developments
will prevail, yet we are certain that institutional knowledge creation
will change drastically over the next decade. Naturally, anyone involved
in research does well to inform themself about these developments. There
is no perfect way by which research will be carried out in the future.
Every researcher has to decide for themself which technologies and
methods they will include in their work. This, however,—as anything in
research—starts with informing oneself about what is already out there;
it is our goal to provide that information with this book.

## Knowledge Creation and Dissemination: A Brief History

In an early draft-version of this book, the present section was called
‘A Brief History of Science’. Yet, we ran into several problems with
this heading. *Firstly*, there is a singularity in the English language
that differentiates between knowledge creation that is concerned with
the rules of the natural world (science) and knowledge creation that is
concerned with the human condition (humanities). Throughout the
preparation of this book we constantly ran into this dilemma and we
would like to take the opportunity to tell you that whenever we talk
about science we mean any organized form of knowledge creation (see
chapter 06, Sidler:
[Open](https://docs.google.com/document/d/19IgWhakIduAZmn6iMEPeVAsnfMESLPP8S5Ohx15WeOo/edit).
*Secondly*, science is often understood as the product created by a
scientist. And a scientist is understood as someone with a full-time job
at a university or a research institute. Yet, new forms of collaboration
reach far beyond our institutional understanding of doing research,
which brings us to certain dissent.

As such we labeled the section ‘Knowledge Creation and Dissemination’.
Knowledge creation and its dissemination are two sides of the same
coin—knowledge does not impact on society if it is unable to disseminate
(Merton 1993). Throughout history we can see that breakthroughs in
knowledge creation went hand in hand with breakthroughs in its
dissemination. In turn, dissemination is not only bound to technological
changes but also societal changes such as freedom of speech or the
Renaissance. In large, the present book is a compendium that presents
current changes that we see in knowledge creation and dissemination.
Actually, many chapters of this book challenge our traditional
understanding of how scientific knowledge should be disseminated.
Moreover, as of today, researchers’ views on how knowledge creation is
changing differ drastically in many aspects. And it is likely that our
understanding differs from your understanding. As such, all we want to
offer in this book is a comprehensive overview on what is changing in
the world of knowledge creation, which foundations are being laid today,
and what might become essential in the future.

The history of human knowledge is closely linked to the history of
civilization—one could even argue that the history of civilization is in
large parts based on knowledge creation and its dissemination. In
prehistoric times, knowledge was passed from one generation to the next
one orally or by showing certain techniques. This mainly applied to
basic everyday tasks such as hunting, fire making, manufacturing
clothes, or gathering nutritious foods. The creation of this knowledge
was not yet structured and it was not recorded, except for occasional
drawings like cave paintings. The drastic change in knowledge creation
was the invention of a writing system. Roughly at the same time,
agriculture came to life. These two inventions combined laid the
groundwork for what we today consider civilization. Civilization allowed
for the division of labour and hence individuals began to
specialize—knowledge creation accelerated. The researcher as a
profession concerned with the creation of knowledge made his debut in
ancient Greece. Scientists like Plato, Aristotle, Pythagoras, Socrates,
or Archimedes wrote their observations down, taught others, and created
knowledge that is still relevant roughly 2500 years later. Disciplines
as we know them today formed many centuries later and as such ancient
scientists were usually philosophers, mathematicians, and physicists in
one. Similar developments were noticeable in other societies as well. In
China for instance thinkers like Confucius, Laozi, or Sun Tzu were
concerned with question similar to those raised in ancient Greece.

During the following centuries, religion played a major role in the
development of knowledge creation. Beliefs about certain essential
questions such as ''how was the earth created?, where do diseases come
from?, ''or *what happens after death?* impeded scientific advances in
many fields and as such slowed down overall knowledge creation. Not very
surprisingly, the Middle Ages are often considered to be a dark age, in
which rational thinking was prohibited. With the invention of the
printing press and the beginning of the Renaissance in the 17th century,
research slowly emancipated itself from religion. Slowly meaning that it
took the church until 1992 to rehabilitate Galileo for his outrageous
claim that the sun might be the center of our universe.

During the Renaissance, considerable amounts of knowledge were created
by a few polymaths—more or less a small group of outstanding thinkers
involved in all kinds of questions ranging from biology, to art, to
engineering—hence the label ‘Renaissance man’. Da Vinci, for instance,
developed machines related to today’s helicopters, analyzed water,
clouds, and rain, painted some of the most important paintings of
mankind, and did considerable research on anatomy. Goethe wrote, did
research in botany, and was in dispute with Newton over questions
concerning optics and color.

What we consider modern science came to life in the 17th century when
knowledge creation was both, professionalized and institutionalized. The
number of scientists started to skyrocket—from a few polymath during the
renaissance to over a million scientists in 1850. This growth did not
slow down over the following 150 years and today we can globally count
roughly 100 million scientists. More and more disciplines formed and
scientists became professional specialists in tiny fields rather than
experts in general knowledge.

## Professionalization of Knowledge Creation: The First Scientific Revolution

The professionalization of knowledge creation is often called the first
scientific revolution. Indeed it is this revolution that laid the
groundwork for many principles that guide scientific work today.
Academic disciplines as we today know them formed during the first
scientific revolution, as did our publishing system. The
professionalisation of knowledge creation required means of assessing
the value of a contribution, so that incentives for successful research
could be provided. Lacking a sufficient system for these incentives,
17th century researchers were secretive in their discoveries. Without a
scientific publication system they claimed inventorship by sending out
anagrams to fellow researchers that did not make sense without knowledge
of the
[discovery](http://www.mathpages.com/home/kmath151/kmath151.htm). This method prevented other scientists from claiming
inventorship, and was still a form of publishing. When the knowledge in
question began to spread and the anagrams could be made sense of, future
research funding was hopefully already secured. Today, this sounds
downright preposterous, as we all agree upon the notion that research is
always based upon other research and as such that research results
should be available to those interested in them.

It was the development of a journal publication system that drastically
changed publishing in research and gave appropriate credits to
researchers. The first journal purely dedicated to science was
*Philosophical Transactions* which has been published ever since (e.g.
one of the first scientific articles (Hook 1665)). Publishing scientific
journal articles became a pivotal building block of modern science.
Researchers developed a common understanding that it is in the common
interest for research results to be openly available to all other
researchers (David 2004). This understanding of the necessity for
openness in science ''“... led to the modern journal system, a system
that is perhaps the most open system for the transmission of knowledge
that could be built with seventeenth-century media” ''(Nielsen 2011).
Based on this core concept of publishing, myriads of partially
institutionalized, partially commercialized structures grew. These
structures developed constitute the cultural, political, and fundamental
background in which academic knowledge creation works till Soenke
Bartling:

Biohackers ciation ?today. The entire system is inherently based upon
journals printed on paper. Almost every scientific publication we see
today is created as if it is meant to be printed. Articles come in very
predefined forms and are usually downloaded as printout-like PDFs. There
is no fundamental reason to stick to this principle—other than our
scientific heritage.

Currently, we can see a transition in knowledge dissemination set off by
the Internet that enables scientists to publish in forms unimaginable
only a few years ago. In all kinds of disciplines these new methods pop
up, be it in the humanities under the term ‘digital humanities’, from a
web 2.0 angle under the term ‘science 2.0’, or from those fighting for
free knowledge under the term ‘open research’ and ‘open science’. The
Internet offers new answers to many challenges which the first
scientific revolution overcame hundreds of years ago. And it is the task
of today's researchers to assess and evaluate those newly created
options, to bridge the legacy gap, and to lay a path towards the second
scientific revolution.

## Legacy Gap: The Background of the Second Scientific Revolution

The journal system developed at a time when written or printed letters
and a few books were the only means of transferring knowledge. Before
printing and disseminating a piece of knowledge, it had to be in a
*complete* and *correct* form, otherwise it was not worth paying for the
costly publication process (Figure 1). Publishers derived control over
scientific content by controlling the printing and dissemination of
scientific results. Accordingly, the assessment of scientific impact
developed around the journal system.

![**Figure 1**. The first scientific revolution happened when the publishing
of scientific papers became the prevailing means of disseminating
scientific knowledge. Our scientific culture developed around this.
Today the Internet provides novel means of publishing and we are in the
‘legacy gap’ between the availability of these tools and their profound
integration into the scientific culture (second scientific revolution).](/images/towards_another_scientific_revolution.png)

However, paper is no longer the only media of choice. Publishing costs
diminished and from a technical viewpoint preliminary results or idea
snippets could be published, edited, and commented on. Yet, research as
a whole is affected by the culture it has developed; it is affected by a
the journal system created when results simply had to be printed on
paper. We are currently in a “legacy gap” (Figure 1) and everything
points to the fact that we are on the brink of a new scientific
revolution. Yet, how this revolution actually will be played out remains
one of the most interesting questions in modern science.

## The Second Scientific Revolution

Picture a situation in which scientists would be able to publish all
their thoughts, results, conclusions, data, and such as they occur,
openly and widely available to everybody. The Internet already provides
tools that could make this possible (microblogs, blogs, wikis, etc.).
Moreover, picture a scientific culture in which researchers could be in
the situation of doing so with the assurance that they will be credited
appropriately. Imagine the potential for interactions between
researchers. Knowledge could flow quickly, regardless of institutions
and personal networks. Research results could be published as they
occur. There would be no need to wait until results are complete enough
to support a full paper. Similarly, if projects were to be stopped,
negative or small findings could be published in blog posts or other low
threshold publications. These findings could therefore still contribute
to the scientific knowledge process. Today, negative results are often
dismissed and thus the entire knowledge created in such a research
project is not available to others. Someone else might start a similar
project running into the same problem that stopped the first project
simply because the first project never published an explanation of its
failure (Figure 2).

![**Figure 2**. Today, research projects are conducted until results justify
a full-blown paper. In the future, scientists might openly share ideas,
preliminary results, and negative results at much earlier stages of
their research using the novel publication methods that became available
with the Internet.](/images/towards_another_scientific_revolution_2.png)

![**Figure 3**. The research culture of the future possibly supports an open
and wide communication beyond institutes and personal networks by
providing novel, credited means of disseminating knowledge between
researchers. Negative as well as positive findings will contribute to
other research projects much sooner after the findings occur.](/images/towards_another_scientific_revolution_3.png)

The advantages of such a scientific culture are multifaceted. We would
see faster knowledge exchange, prevention of unnecessarily repeated
experiments, and a more vivid discussion (Figure 3). However,in order to
use these novel publication formats, they must be appropriately credited
by other scientists and—maybe more importantly—by granting authorities,
which is not yet the case.

## Naming the New: Science 2.0, Open Science, eScience, Mode2, Open Research

Terms like Science 2.0, Open Science, Digital Humanities, eScience,
Mode2, or Open Research are all umbrella terms that formed over the past
few years **and** that emphasize various aspects of the second
scientific revolution.

![**Figure 4**. Since the first scientific revolution, science and knowledge
creation was open—as open as the methods of the seventeenth century
allowed it to be. The Internet has brought about novel methods, thus
allowing science to be more open.](/images/towards_another_scientific_revolution_4.png)

All of these umbrella terms struggle to find a clear definition and
people often use them interchangeably when talking about current changes
in scientific pursuits. We sought after defining each and every one of
these terms in order to establish a coherent picture of how the change
in knowledge creation is seen from different angles. Yet, what each of
the terms means and how exactly it differs from the others is often
unclear. If you ask five people how Mode 2 and Science 2.0 are
associated you can be certain to get five different and possibly
contradictory answers. All terms are somewhat born of the necessity that
a term for the present changes was needed. Knowledge creation is a wide
field and thus several terms emerged, whereof we would like to define
only two—mainly in order to use them in the discussions contained within
this book.

-   **Science 2.0** refers to all scientific culture, incl. scientific communication, which employs features enabled by Web 2.0 and the Internet (in contrast to Science 1.0 which represents a scientific culture that does not take advantage of the Internet).
-   **Open Science** refers to a scientific culture that is
    characterized by its openness. Scientist share results almost
    immediately and with a very wide audience. Strictly speaking, since
    the first scientific revolution, science has been open (Figure 4).
    Through the Internet and Web 2.0 science can become ‘*more* open
    science’, meaning that researchers share results, ideas, and data
    much earlier and much more extensively to the public than they do at
    the moment.

Science 2.0 enables Open Science, but Science 2.0 does not necessarily
have to happen in an open science fashion, since scientists can still
employ features of the Internet, but stay very much put in terms of
publishing their results. This might be due to cultural and legal
restrictions.

## The Second Scientific Revolution: Road to a Great New Future?

Many stakeholders serve the current scientific culture. They brought
research, and with it society, quite far. Yet now, we have to face the
challenges that come with all the novel developments and with the second
scientific revolution. History shows that knowledge creation has always
adopted new opportunities. In turn, it certainly will do so this time,
too. Yet the question remains as to who will be the drivers and the
stakeholders of tomorrow. In the best case, the biggest benefactor will
be the scientific knowledge generating process—and with it research
itself.

Many researchers show considerable concern in respect to the novel
concepts of the second scientific revolution. From these concerns vivid
discussions should arise and useful conclusions should be found that
steer the second scientific revolution in the right direction. This is
especially true since significant input should come from within the
active research community itself.

Another question is whether future *openness* and *onlineness* will set
optimal incentives for the creation of knowledge. Many wrong paths could
be picked and may result in dead-ends. It is important that stakeholders
are flexible and honest enough to be able to leave dead-end streets.

Some voices discuss the current transition of research as a
revolutionizing process that might overcome current shortcomings in
scientific conduct. Shortcomings are among many others: questionable
proof generating means (such as wrongly applied statistics (Ioannidis
2005; Sterne 2001), intolerance against uncommon theses and approaches,
citation-based ‘truth generation’, and inflexible cultures of scientific
approaches within disciplines. Furthermore, publication-bias through
rejection of negative results or rejection of non-confirming studies
(Turner et al. 2008; Begley & Ellis 2012) and questionable incentives
that are set by the current methods to assess scientific quality (see
chapter 03, Binswanger: Excellence by Nonsense: The Competition for
Publications in Modern Science) are also factors. The transition towards
the second scientific revolution can help to solve these problems, but
it does not necessarily have to. It can be a way to make science more
open, liberal, and fair, but it can also result in the opposite.

To conclude, much will depend upon whether researchers become the
leading force within this transition, or whether they play a passive
role driven by other stakeholders of the research process. In order to
prevent the latter, researchers should be deeply involved in this
process and they should be aware of the potential consequences. This
book is meant to support scientists in becoming a constructing factor in
the designing process of the second scientific revolution.

## The Second Scientific Revolution is Based on Many Novel Aspects and Tools

Despite their separation, the key aspects of the second scientific
revolution are interconnected (Figure 5). Open Access (see chapter 09,
[Open Access: A State of the Art](http://localhost:4000/tools/open_access_state_of_the_art)), for instance, needs new forms
of copyright concepts (see case 19, [Creative Commons Licences](/cases_recipes_howtos/creative_commons_licences)).
Reference managers (see chapter 08, [Reference Management](/tools/reference_management))
are a great addition to social networks for scientists (see chapter 07,
[Academia Goes Facebook? The Potential of Social Network Sites in the Scholarly Realm](/tools/academia_goes_facebook)). Assessing the scientific impact of novel
publications such as blog posts (see chapter 06, [(Micro)blogging Science? Notes on Potentials and Constraints of New Forms of Scholarly Communication](http://localhost:4000/tools/microblogging_science) needs novel impact measurement factors — altmetrics (see chapter 12,
[Altmetrics and Other Novel Measures for Scientific Impact](http://localhost:4000/vision/altmetrics)), which
might be based on unambiguous researcher IDs (see case 21,
[Unique Identifiers for Researchers](/cases_recipes_howtos/unique_identifiers_for_researchers)).
Altmetrics, at the same time, can be integrated into social networks.
There is no single most important factor: it is more a multitude of
facets that jointly change how research works.

![**Figure 5**. It is important to understand that many tools of the second
scientific revolution will only make sense if others are also
implemented. For example, alternative impact measurement systems such as
altmetrics only make sense if researchers can be uniquely identified -
either with a Unique Researcher ID or within a social network.](/images/towards_another_scientific_revolution_5.png)

## How This Book Works: Artificially Dissecting the Second Scientific Revolution

This book brings together the enabling concepts that shape the current
discussion on our changing research environment. We divided the book
into three parts in order to make its content easily accessible.

-   The first part of the book is called **Basics**; here we cover
    topics that highlight the overall shift in scientific thinking. It
    begins with the chapter “Open Science: One Term, Five Schools of
    Thought” in which *Benedikt Fecher* and editor *Sascha Friesike*
    explain the many meanings which have been given to the term Open
    Science. This is followed by *Mathias Binswanger’s* “Excellence by
    Nonsense: The Competition for Publications in Modern Science” in
    which he highlights some of the downsides in today publication
    driven scientific environments. *Alexander Gerber’s* article titled
    “Science Caught Flat-footed: How Academia Struggles with Open
    Science Communication” follows; here the author explains why social
    media are adopted quite slowly by the research community, especially
    in Europe. The last article in the section was written by *Michelle
    Sidler* and is entitled “Open Science and the Three Cultures:
    Expanding Open Science to All Domains of Knowledge Creation”; in it
    the author highlights a core weakness that the terms Open Science
    and Science 2.0 share: the fact that all of the implied concepts are
    valid for researchers outside the sciences as well, yet the name
    might scare them away.
-   The second part of the book is called **Tools** and deals with
    implementations that already work today. *Cornelius Puschmann*
    starts the section with his piece on blogging and microblogging
    among researches called “(Micro)blogging Science? Notes on
    Potentials and Constraints of New Forms of Scholarly Communication”.
    He is followed by *Michael Nentwich* and *René König’s* article
    “Academia Goes Facebook? The Potential of Social Network Sites in
    the Scholarly Realm”. “Reference Management” by *Martin Fenner*,
    *Kaja Scheliga*, and editor *Sönke Bartling* is the next chapter. It
    is succeeded by “Open Access: A State of the Art” by *Dagmar Sitek*
    and *Roland Bertelmann*, and *James MacGregor, Kevin Stranack*,
    and *John Willinsky’s* “The Public Knowledge Project: Open Source
    Tools for Open Access to Scholarly Communication”.
-   The third part named **Vision** takes a more long term view on the
    issue and thus explains how single aspects of research might develop
    over the next decade or two. The section begins with an article by
    *Martin Fenner* named “Altmetrics and Other Novel Measures for
    Scientific Impact” and an article by *Lambert Heller*, *Ronald The*,
    and *Sönke Bartling* called “Dynamic Publication Formats”. It
    follows “Open Research Data” by *Heinz Pampel* and *Sünje
    Dallmeier-Tiessen*, and “Intellectual Property and Computational
    Science” by *Victoria Stodden.* The next chapter is called “Research
    Funding in Science 2.0” and was written by *Jörg Eisfeld-Reschke*,
    *Ulrich Herb*, and Karsten Wenzlaff. The last chapter of the
    book was written by *Thomas* *Schildhauer* and *Hilger* *Voss* and
    is entitled “Open Innovation and Crowdsourcing in the Sciences”.
-   The book closes with a collection of cases which highlight in a
    rather brief manner some aspects of the Open Science movement. Here
    the authors focus on specific aspects and projects, give advice, or
    present their experience

## References

Begley, C.G. & Ellis, L.M., 2012. Drug development: Raise standards for
preclinical cancer research. *Nature*, 483(7391), pp.531–533.
<doi:10.1038/483531a>.

Boyd, D.M. & Ellison, N.B., 2007. Social Network Sites: Definition,
History, and Scholarship. *Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication*,
13(1), pp.210–230. doi:10.1111/j.1083-6101.2007.00393.x.

David, P.A., 2004. Understanding the emergence of “open science”
institutions: functionalist economics in historical context. *Industrial
and Corporate Change*, 13(4), pp.571–589. doi:10.1093/icc/dth023.

Hook, M., 1665. Some Observations Lately Made at London Concerning the
Planet Jupiter. *Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of
London*, 1(1-22), pp.245–247. doi:10.1098/rstl.1665.0103.

Ioannidis, J.P.A., 2005. Why Most Published Research Findings Are False.
*PLoS Medicine*, 2(8), p.e124. doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.0020124.

Merton, R.K., 1993. *On the shoulders of giants: a Shandean postscript*
Post-Italianate ed., University of Chicago Press ed., Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.

Nielsen, M., 2011. *Reinventing Discovery: The New Era of Networked
Science*, Princeton University Press.

Sterne, J.A.C., 2001. Sifting the evidence---what’s wrong with
significance tests? Another comment on the role of statistical methods.
*BMJ*, 322(7280), pp.226–231. doi:10.1136/bmj.322.7280.226.

Turner, E.H., Matthews, A.M., Linardatos, E., Tell, R.A., 2008.
Selective Publication of Antidepressant Trials and Its Influence on
Apparent Efficacy. *New England Journal of Medicine*, 358(3),
pp.252–260. doi:10.1056/NEJMsa065779.